First impressions in the workplace really matter — and not just to the employer. New employees can begin to formulate impressions about organizations from the get-go, influencing their decision to stay with the company in the long term. Poor onboarding experiences can lead to unnecessary and preventable turnover, the cost of which can be as much as twice the employee’s annual salary.
It’s difficult to measure whether your onboarding efforts are succeeding, however. At Microsoft, where we hire thousands of people every year, we lacked a good way to measure the perceptions of our onboarding experience, aside from trying to draw conclusions from attrition numbers.
In an effort to better understand what we thought of as “early attrition,” we turned to an obvious opportunity that had been overlooked. We started to simply ask employees about their experiences. We created a survey and reached out after their first week and then again after 90 days to learn about new hires’ experiences and first impressions of Microsoft.
From the survey, we learned that the little things matter most to new hires — like having a working computer and immediate access to the building, email, and the intranet on day one. Based on this, we pulled individuals together from payroll, IT, immigration, legal, global security, learning, procurement, recruiting, and HR to land on a common goal: Make sure new employees are productive on day one. Every member of the team contributed to the shared goal, and as a result all the organizational barriers were broken down. Now we review progress monthly, learning and sharing ideas and feedback to guarantee the success of all new employees.
Delving deeper, we wanted to understand how their early behaviors impact the engagement of approximately 3,000 new hires. By partnering with Microsoft’s Workplace Analytics division, we matched anonymous calendar and email metadata with (equally anonymous) engagement data. Statements we used to gauge engagement included “I feel proud to work for Microsoft” and “I expect to work for Microsoft for __ years.”
We learned that it’s critical for a new employee to have a one-on-one meeting with their manager during their first week. Those who did saw early growth in three key areas.
First, they tended to have a 12% larger internal network and double network centrality (the influence that people in an employee’s network have) within 90 days. This is important because employees who grow their internal network feel that they belong and may stay at the company longer. For example, employees who engage internally intend to stay at a rate that’s 8% higher on our intent-to-stay measure. They also report a stronger sense of belonging on their team while maintaining their authentic self.
Second, they had higher-quality meetings. Higher-quality meetings have fewer declines, fewer layers of management in attendance, fewer attendees who send emails during the meetings, and fewer attendees in total, and they tend to be shorter, too (one hour or less).
Third, they spent nearly three times as much time collaborating with their team as those who did not have a one-on-one. This early team collaboration is important: Employees who spend more time collaborating have higher favorability about belonging on team than those who don’t, and they tend to report having higher-quality meetings.
These and other insights are helping us shine a spotlight on the employee experience and guide us on where to adjust to make a new hire’s experience even better. And this is just the beginning at Microsoft. We are now experimenting with other ways to improve the onboarding experience, with a focus on the new employees’ network — particularly when the manager works in a different location.
But at the end of the day, it all comes down to this: Don’t underestimate the power of having a one-on-one during a person’s first week. That sounds obvious, but it could be the most important connection for the new employee to make.

The Rise of Analytics in HR
The era of talent intelligence is here
About this report The need for high-performing talent has never been greater, so it’s more important than ever to leverage data in human resources. Data analytics can help organizations hire the right candidate for the right job at the right time. But building a data-driven function across every dimension of HR – from talent acquisition, performance, and workforce planning to workplace policies, employee engagement, and retention – can be complex and challenging. Compiled through in-depth research and discussions with leading HR leaders, this report addresses many of the questions that come with ramping up your talent analytics capabilities, including: • What is the role of analytics in the evolution of the HR function? • What challenges can HR analytics solve? • What industries are adopting HR analytics in North America? • What skills are required of leaders and teams to leverage the true value of analytics? • How can the HR function move from data to insights that drive outcomes?
Conversations about applying data analytics to HR management aren’t new. Despite more than a decade of discussion, organizations are at different maturity levels when it comes to its adoption. Some use it for simple reporting while others have gone deep and implemented sophisticated predictive analytics. The discrepancy in adoption levels can be attributed, in part, to varying objectives by industry. Some need to justify investments and predict risks while others are more concerned with workforce planning business decisions and peer benchmarking. According to Deloitte’s 2017 Human Capital Trends report, 71% of companies see people analytics as a high priority, but only 9% believe they have a good understanding of which talent dimension drives performance in their organizations.1 Even though analytics has been on HR leaders’ minds for quite some time, it’s only in the last five years that we’ve seen a rapid rise in adoption rates. When we looked at LinkedIn data, we found that in the last five years in North America, there has been a 3x increase in HR professionals who list analytics skills and keywords on their profiles. While many HR professionals leverage analytics as part of their general HR role, an increasing number focus primarily on HR analytics. These specialists work on teams with names like “talent analytics” and “people analytics” at a number of the more forward-thinking enterprise companies.
Behind the rise of analytics One major question surrounding data analytics is why its growth is happening now. As it happens, the main drivers are pretty easy to discern. They include executive leadership, technological innovation, and an increasingly competitive landscape. • The CEO’s relationship with the CHRO According to the PwC CEO survey, 77% of CEOs believe the biggest threat to their business is the lack of availability of key skills. With CEOs so concerned about talent, it’s important for the CHRO to help plan for the workforce of the future. HR data analytics can help answer many of the critical concerns CHROs must grapple with, including workforce diversity, geolocation decisions, hiring strategy, competitive benchmarking, workforce planning, and employer branding. • The growth in HR technology and innovation Over the last five years, the adoption of technology has moved from static HR management solutions to more dynamic, real-time cloud and mobile-based tools and platforms. These solutions are being integrated in the areas of recruitment, collaboration, productivity, learning, wellness, and performance management. Sierra-Cedar research shows that 45% of large companies and 51% of mid-sized companies are increasing their spending on HR technology. Of course, this trend is not restricted to employers – today’s technological innovation has transformed how talent looks for work. The vast majority of candidates can now be found online. Candidates have access to an abundance of information on companies and opportunities, allowing them to engage with recruiters, companies, and other employees as they explore the job market. • An increasingly competitive landscape Beyond basic consumer-facing competition, organizations are vying for the best of a limited talent pool. This challenge is best addressed through workforce analytics and planning, including identifying an organization’s future needs in terms of size, structure, type of talent, experience, skills, and industry knowledge. Analytics can also ensure access to a pipeline of qualified candidates so companies can remain competitive in the future. Many businesses might know where they need to be in the next two to five years, but what about 10 to 15 years down the road? This predictive form of analytics is becoming an irreplaceable tool for managing teams effectively, maximizing profits, and ensuring long-term success.
