What makes a good leader? This is a hotly discussed question and also when the topic falls upon differences in the effectiveness between male and female leaders. Emotions have so far driven these conversations, but we are now beginning to get some data to support a more informed debate.
Personally, when it comes to these types of conversations I like to let the data speak; what do we know about the difference in leadership effectiveness between men and women? The data I will share first come from 360-evaluations, which we have collected in collaboration with our partner Zenger Folkman, who are also writing extensively about this. 360-evaluations measure the judgment of a leader’s leader, peers, direct reports and other relevant input givers. We ask these individuals to rate each leader’s effectiveness by evaluating how well he or she performs on 16 competencies, which have proven to be the most important to overall leadership effectiveness. Also it is worth bearing in mind, that 360-surveys have the highest predictor for success within an organisation compared with other assessment forms.
In a specific survey of 7,280 leaders from a mix of public and private organisations across the world give some really interesting insights into this area; in some ways it confirms things we assumed about men and women leaders in the workplace but also holds some surprises.
The main conclusion is that female leaders score significantly higher than their male counterparts on 360-degree evaluations and that this gap widens the more senor the leaders are. This is shown in the below table.

Interestingly, looking deeper into the data, of the 16 competencies, which the leaders are measured upon, women leaders score significantly higher on 12 of them (mostly on Takes Initiative, Practice Self-Development, Displays High Integrity & Honesty as well as Drives For Results) and only significantly lower on one (Develops Strategic Perspective). So the typical stereotypes, which would have us believe that women leaders excel at the “soft” competencies are not completely true; women actually do really well on many of the so-called hard competencies as well.
Another analysis of the data provides an interesting insight; the relative effectiveness of women leaders appears to improve over time. At the beginning of their respective careers there appear to be little difference between men and women, but over time this women are perceived in an increasingly positive way and more effecting than their male counterparts. This continues until they reach their 60’s, when the gap begins to narrow.
Our data is just one out of many backing up this conclusion. One study, led by Professor Øyvind Martinsen, head of Leadership and Organizational Behavior at the BI Norwegian Business School, assessed in a study the personality and characteristics of nearly 3,000 managers. In nearly all areas, the study concluded that women were better leaders than their male colleagues. Women outperformed men in four of the five categories: initiative and clear communication; openness and ability to innovate; sociability and supportiveness; and methodical management and goal-setting. This corresponds well with our own findings. Interestingly, men did better than women at dealing with work-related stress and they had higher levels of emotional stability.
When we look into the split between male and female leaders, it is unfortunately still the case that women represent a relatively small part of the overall leadership population – especially at top level. Why is that the case  if they are better than their male counterparts? Certainly, discrimination is a potential explanation but frankly, I don’t really think the gap can be explained by conscious discrimination. If we are looking at that direction, I think it has more to do with unconscious bias but again, I think this is only one (small) element of the explanation. Let’s look more into that in another blog post.
Why might it be true that women are better than men when it comes to leadership? I think there might be many avenues of answers to this. Let me offer four different ones;
1.	It might be that women receive higher scores on 360’s because of bias. These bias could come from believing that women are better at ‘people issues’, that they (the women) must be good if they have made it into leadership or other cognitive bias.
2.	Another explanation is that because so few women are selected to leadership positions, only the very best are selected – a natural selection bias if you will – which will mean that women are not better than men as leaders but because the quality selected means that the female appear better. Had there been an equal amount of men and women the scores would have been the same.
3.	Another reason might be that women has to be better leaders than men to be selected as leaders thus making them better. This suggests that there are two levels of entrance into leadership; one for men and one for women.  This was explained by a group of women in a Harvard Business Review article with statements such as “We need to work harder than men to prove ourselves.”, “We feel the constant pressure to never make a mistake, and to continually prove our value to the organization.”
4.	A fourth reason could lie in an underlying intelligence of succeeding as leader i.e. being good in emotional intelligence. There is plenty of evidence to suggest that women score higher than men generally on emotional intelligence competencies. Perhaps traditional cognitive intelligences which men traditionally has performed well in account for less in terms of leadership effectiveness today.
The above suggestions are just speculations with limited theory and data to support. But I would be very interested in your possible answers to this.
So what does this mean? First of all, most organisations find it hard to attract and/or develop great leaders. I believe leadership is a fundamental element in any successful organisation. Great leaders creates great business results. So from a pure business perspective, organisations should attract qualified leaders from the largest possible pool of talent which includes of course all women. Secondly, whatever practice or cultural element is creating this situation, you should know that this is holding back your organisation. Work on your culture to eliminate any processes, behaviours and reasons for this.
A final note: More companies are implementing unconscious bias training in recruitment as a mean to hire more female leaders. The argument goes that it is due to unconscious bias that women are not selected as leaders and with proper training men will become aware of these bias an adjust accordingly. Having spent some time trying to find evidence to support the effectiveness of this kind of training – and being unsuccessful at that – I would suggest that other methods should be used instead. It is unclear what exact bias the training is targeted, how the training will sustain such a radical change and how the effect is measured.

3 ways leadership behaviors are reflected in employee feedback
We all intuitively know that there is a link between leadership and culture. Leadership has a significant impact on the morale and feelings of employees and we know that leadership drives retention. It is the cornerstone of engagement - everything else depends on it.
When I’m talking about the connection between leadership and culture, there are three things that I find particularly interesting:
1.	If people’s perception of their leaders starts to decline you can expect a quick ~10% drop in overall engagement levels. 
2.	This decline can take a long time to turn around.
3.	There are early indicators that can show you when leadership perceptions are starting to decline or are on the rise. These can help you address an issue before it becomes a much larger problem.
Nothing makes engagement fall faster than when people lose confidence in leadership
It’s rare to see any single factor have a more substantial and rapid impact on engagement than leadership perception. If there’s a perception that leadership is not connected to your people you can generally expect a quick double digit drop in engagement.
It may take just days for people’s perception of leadership to fall, but it can take three to six months for these perceptions to recover (even if immediate action is taken). This is similar across every industry - leaders need to re-establish trust and that requires people need to see their leaders in a range of situations.
Whilst this is the general pattern, there are some interesting situations when engagement can go up rapidly which may be counterintuitive at first. One of the most profound things I've seen is engagement rising when a company encounters some bad or challenging events. When we dig into the data we often find that the leader hasn’t been very communicative when things were going well, but they start using more honest communication and explaining what’s happening when times are bad. Engagement scores go up because people are really impressed that their leaders are communicating and telling them what’s happening.
Indicators can help detect changes in leadership perceptions
There are leading indicators that can show a decline or increase in how leaders are perceived. These can be found in the answers that people give in employee feedback surveys. In a typical engagement survey, there are perhaps four to six questions that directly ask about the senior strategic leaders of the organization. There are then another 25 to 30 questions in diagnostic feedback surveys that focus in on the broader leaders of the organization.
One of the most telling engagement survey questions on leadership perceptions is “Do your leaders demonstrate that people are important to the organization?” If the answer to this is negative (and increasing) it’s a strong predictor that churn rates will start to increase and engagement scores may drop.
It’s when you see a quick drop in a leadership measure like this that the overall engagement score is likely to fall rapidly and substantially by 10% or more. Whilst it can be hard to predict leadership disasters that will trigger this kind of response, you can often see clues in text analytics. Looking at the extent that people are qualitatively forgiving can often provide clues as to whether a breaking point is on the horizon.
For scores to increase, people need to see their leaders as strong and feel connected to the organization. The question that can indicate the tide is turning is “The leaders at [Company] have communicated a vision that motivates me.” This looks at the ability of leadership to communicate a vision that resonates with people.
We often see a positive connection when a new leader comes in and they are able to quickly and effectively communicate their vision. Once people feel connected to the vision and aligned with the organization's direction confidence rises. They believe they're on a winning team. That's one of the fastest ways for engagement scores to go up.
Leadership has a significant impact on overall engagement in any organization. If perceptions are negative it can be sudden and drastic, and it can take time to turnaround. By focusing on leading indicators you can identify potential problems and turn around how your people perceive leadership. The key is in your employee feedback data.
The top five things associated with good leadership
We know that good leadership is associated with higher levels of Engagement, less churn and higher Glassdoor ratings, but what are the specific things that good leadership is associated with inside organizations?
To understand this we looked at data from over 200,000 people who rated leadership as well as their feelings about a range of other workplace factors. From this we could determine some of the key things that were linked to good leadership versus poor leadership.
Good leadership was associated with favorable perceptions on a diverse range of things ranging from people being motivated and likely to recommend the organization through to more subtle things such as perceptions around fairness in reward and recognition. Good leadership was also associated with people feeling there was open honest communication and that they could make a positive difference in their organizations.
